By Alana Wesly, 06/10/2025. ICS 311 Assigment 2, balanced trees with Olelo Noeau example.

Effectiveness and Efficiency of Data Structures
  A balanced binary search tree was used to create a database of Olelo Noeau, or Hawaiian proverbs and their English translations. The use of a balanced tree in the first place is ideal because it decreases the amount of nodes that any given algorithm would have to access to do a task, which makes both the runtime and memory use smaller. Balanced trees have a time complexity of O(log n) for the operations used for the proverb dictionary, including searching, inserting, identifying the first and last in order, and the element before or after annother element in order.  This is an ideal time complexity, as it is one of the lowest runtime options possible, along with O(1). Specifically a binary search tree was used for the implementation of a balanced tree, because it allows for the balanced tree to retain a specific ordering, which is important for operations with strings, that benefit from them being alphebetically sorted. 

Effectiveness and Efficiency of Algorithms
  The functions used on the balanced tree are recursive. These are the insert, member, first, last, predacessor, successor, meHua, and withWord algorithms. Recursion, like the use of a balanced tree, can cut down on the number of steps required to do a task by using "Divide and Conquer," or splittig up the probelm into smaller tasks repetitively, before finishing the task and combining the results. It also models the structure of a tree, by working in a hierarchical manner, which can be seen if the algorithms steps and results are translated to visuals. The recursion goes through the balanced tree, from the top level root and down each level until it finds the intended spot on the tree. Additionally, while recursion traditionally can increase memory use, when used for a balanced tree with a logarithmic time complexity, the memory impact is negligible. The choice of implementing all of this in python was arbitrary, and simply because of familarity and ease of use compared to the alternatives.
